---
layout: post
title: "Communication, Trust and Honesty"
date: 2015-05-12 00:10:32 -0500
comments: true
categories: [Personal]
---

A friend asked me an interesting question in an email the other
day. It wasn't especially succinctly put, so I'll try to paraphrase
the best I can. Basically, she was wondering what my take was on a
story she had from a friend of a friend regarding trust and honesty in
relationships.

> A friend of a friend of mine recently got into a big argument with
> her boyfriend because his ex girlfriend called in the middle of the
> night one night, and she asked who called and he said just his buddy
> at work, but then she checked his phone and it was his ex.  And it
> wasn't the fact that it was his ex that got her mad, it was the fact
> that he lied about it Why would he lie about it?

Specifically she was sort of wondering how situations like this work
out in poly relationships. But it's hard for me to answer that
question without talking about what it means to have trust, and how
that relates to communication, and being honest.

<!--more-->

While I was pondering my response to my friend I ended up thinking
pretty deeply about when honesty is important, and what exactly trust
means. And most especially how these ideas depend on and effect how I
communicate with people and want people to communicate with me.

I think that it's pretty much nonsensical to talk about anything
regarding relationships, trust, or honesty without talking about
communication. In some sense, relationships are built more
fundamentally on the communication patterns between people than
anything else. Trust and honesty, or their counterparts, mistrust and
dishonesty are really descriptions of what we think of others'
communication patterns - both with us, and with the world at large.

I think it's common, and certainly tempting to talk about Truth (yes,
with a capital T) when discussing trust and honesty, but I think that
is a mistake. First of all, I'm something of a relativist, and I don't
think that there is a whole lot of Truth-with-a-capital-T out there. I
think most of the time the best we can hope for is to observe the
world, and the people in it and to say "Well, this is what I've seen
so far." Making absolute statements about what can and cannot be, or
should and should not be is hard to do with accuracy. Especially when
talking about people.

<Questionable>
If you deny the things that are true in other
people's experience, you risk denying a lot of who they are as a
person.

These concepts are so interlinked in my mind that I'm not sure which
one to start with. Linear narratives are so limiting!

I'll start by talking about communication. Here are some things that I
think make effective communication. Openness and vulnerability. Being
able and willing to listen. Being willing to volunteer and share
things. I have more to say about communication, but let's start there.


I think I would define an honest person as someone who has
transparently good intentions. I think transparency is a key element
of that definition, but it's distinct from ideas like "radical
honesty." I think the idea of radical honesty - that is, saying
everything that comes to your mind without filtering - points out an
important aspect of normal honesty: what you choose not to
say. Transparent doesn't mean people can see everything about you. It
means you're not intentionally hiding things that are important to
others understanding your motivations and intentions.


Let's switch now to talking about trust. If I trust someone, it's
because I believe that they are honest. More particularly, I believe
that they are honest with me, and I believe they have good intentions
towards me. What it doesn't mean is that I expect that person to tell
me everything.


Now we come back to communication. It seems like an obvious fact that
differet people know different things than I do. At the very least,
that person knows vastly more about their inner thoughts and feelings,
desires and fears than I (or anybody else external to them) could
possibly ever know. We can observe, and sometimes interpret things
about others more clearly, but fundamentally because everyone has
different experiences we can't even fully or clearly understand what
another person thinks or feels about experiences that we've fully
shared with them.

On a more trivial level, just because we are separate people and don't
physically see, heard and otherwise experience the same physical
stimuli all the time, we have different personal histories (a part of
the things we know).

One of the important things about good communication with others is
sharing of experiences. Being willing and interested in sharing the
important or amusing or sad or whatever experiences we've had that the
other person hasn't witnessed (sometimes even wanting to share about
experiences that the other person participated in!). When I have an
interesting interaction with a random person on the bus, I want to
share it with my best friends when I see them, partly to process it,
and partly to build more shared context for our relationship (another
important aspect of relationships!!).

But we don't always share everything. I used to date a woman who I
would definitely describe as an "over-communicator." She was so
concerned with sharing the important details of her life with me (and
her other partners) that she ended up sharing lots of minutiae about
her day and her life. Things that were often interesting, but not
always strictly necessary. This wouldn't be a problem, except for the
sheer volume of experience that humans take in on a daily basis. I
already have to deal with all of my own experiences. When a tendency
for over-communication is combined with an excellent memory (as it was
in my lady friend), the amount of shared information can be
burdensome. To invoke a common phrase from the jargon of signal
processing, it becomes hard to separate the signal from the noise.

Listening, I mean really actively, intently listening to another human
being's experience, is hard work and it takes effort. And most people
(myself especially) don't have an infinite amount of effort that we
can expend. While dating this woman I often would feel overwhelmed and
inundated with the sheer volume of her experience. To help deal with
this, I often listened less actively and intently.

Finally, we can talk about trust. In light of all these other
concepts, the way that I understand trust is this. When I say I trust
someone, I'm saying that I believe that they will filter their
experience and share with me the pieces of knowledge they have that
they believe are important for me to have as well.

There are actually two aspects to trust. I trust people to volunteer
information as previously described. I can't possibly imagine all the
questions I would need to ask to get people to tell me all the things
they know that I would find important.

But there's also an aspect of trust related to the sharing of
information. And I think that has to do with how people observe
us. Specifically, when I trust you by sharing something, I do it in
the belief that you will continue to believe that I'm an honest
person, that I still have good intentions towards you.

This is easy to do when the information we share has no personal
importance, both to us and to the recipient. It becomes vastly harder
when the information is deeply personal to one or the other and higher
still when it's significant to both giver and receiver.

Notice what I've done here though. Nothing I said about communication
or honesty or trust has implied that full-disclosure is required, or
always the best policy. That's because I don't believe that it is.

First, I have some personal stories that illustrate well aspects of
trust and honesty the communications that have effected them.

First story: I have this female friend. We are pretty close, and in
particular I used to always greet her with great big bear hugs where I
would pick her up and gently rock/swing her back-and-forth. It was a
fun and bonding little mini-ritual.

Funny story, I also used to pretty much only wear sweatpants. This
started when I was doing parkour regularly and I became very
dissatisfied with the mobility offered by most "normal" pants,
especially jeans. As it turns out, sweatpants are soft. And when you
pick someone up in a full arm wrap bear hug, you end up in the rather
intimate position of having pretty much your entire bodies pressed
together.

This woman, I'll call her Linda, and I have a mutual friend who I'll
call Bert. Bert is certainly my closest male friend in the world, so
we tend to talk quite regularly. Bert and Linda are also quite close,
and tend to talk a lot. They actually communicate and hang out more
than Linda and I do (unimportant). The point of the story is that one
day, I was talking to Bert on the phone shortly after he'd been
hanging out and talking with Linda. She had shared with him the
strangeness of the fact that it was surprisingly not awkward that
every time I hugged her like that she could quite distinctly feel my
penis through my clothes. And Bert found this so hilarious that he
felt the need to share it with me.

Because of who I am, this was pretty embarrassing for me to find
out. Linda and I had a strictly platonic, though in some ways
physically intimate relationship. This was in fact so deeply
embarrassing to me that it caused two fairly significant changes in my
behavior. First, I began to start feeling embarrassed about wearing
sweatpants, particularly in public where before I had felt entirely
un-selfconscious about it. Second, and much more sadly, I stopped
hugging Linda in that same way. In fact, that knowledge, like the
knowledge of Good and Evil obtained from the Forbidden Fruit seriously
tainted my relationship with Linda.

It also had a smaller effect. It made me trust Bert less. I think
there are two reasons why this is so. It was pretty clear to me that
Linda didn't want to explicitly share this information with me, and so
it was clear that Bert was violating Linda's trust by doing
so. Secondly, he violated my trust that he would filter his experience
for that which is important for me to know. This may not be as
obvious, so I'll spell it out. He shared information with me which did
nothing to enhance my life. It embarrassed me, it wasn't particularly
amusing, it didn't help me feel closer to him or to Linda - indeed,
because of the embarrassment it actually made me distance myself from
Linda a bit. And it tainted the innocence of a really pleasant
interaction between Linda and I. It also made me feel less connected
with Bert. Since he didn't anticipate these negative reactions, it
made me feel like he didn't know or understand me as well as I had
previously thought.

In summary, I think choosing carefully what not to share can be as
important (or more so) than choosing what you do.


To analyze my friends story a bit. For such a short snippet, there are
a lot of interesting aspects. First, let's assign some shorter labels
than "the girlfriend/boyfriend in the story." How about Joe and Sal?

Now, it seems clear that Joe decided to filter the information that it
was his ex-girlfriend on the phone from Sal. We can interpret this in
two ways, either he didn't trust that sharing that information with
Sal would be safe, or he judged that it wasn't an important thing
about his experience to share with her. Sal's response of snooping in
Joe's phone later pretty clearly indicates that she didn't trust that
Joe was sharing all of the important things she was interested in.


Now, with all of this background lexicon, and a concrete example to
work from we can start to talk about what I think makes a good
relationship. To me, a foundation of trust, honesty and communication
is critical to a good relationship, both romantically, with friends,
and with business partners.

In an ideal world, this means that things that are low-stakes for me
are low stakes for my partner as well. If it doesn't mean anything
that my ex is calling in the middle of the night, then it's easy for
me to share that with my girlfriend, and it's easy for her to hear it
since she also knows it doesn't mean anything.

But there's a lot that can go awry in this ideal world. First, maybe
it does mean something to me, or to my ex and maybe that will worry my
girlfriend. Or maybe my girlfriend will be worried even if it doesn't
mean anything between me and my ex!

To me, the big fight that ensued would have to be the start of a
larger conversation. I would probably question the relationship itself
if I felt the need to lie about something like that. Or I'd question
whether my ex really is or should be my ex if a simple phone call from
her is that meaningful.

But in Joe's situation I would also want to know why Sally was
snooping in my phone. I value my privacy.


Trust is hard. It's hardest to establish, and it's even harder to
re-establish after it's been broken. I think this is because there's
no proxy or indicator we can use for trustworthiness. We simply have
to trust people, and then hope that it isn't misplaced. This is why
regaining trust is so hard. It's easier emotionally to place a small
amount of trust in someone when you first meet and then let it grow
organically over time and lots of small interactions. But loss of
trust only really matters when it's big, and with someone close to
us. This usually means we've known them a long time, and ended up
trusting them a lot. One really bad experience can make us re-evaluate
a whole lifetimes worth of small decisions. This calls into question
the whole basis for our relationship and in some ways resets us back
to 0, or even a negative trusting state. But you can't just pretend
not to know someone and start again. Most humans don't really work
like that.


Now we know the old saying "the road to hell is paved with good
intentions." So it's not quite enough just to have good intentions.



Ultimately, the way I want people to deal with me in relationships is
with transparently good intentions. (story about my mom not punishing
or forbidding the usage of "curse" words, but not being okay with
harmful intent behind innocent words).  This was a deeper lesson than
about manners and social skills. It was about approaching people with
kindness, and having good intentions towards the world and the people
in it. It was about being a good person.
