---
layout: post
title: "Thoughts on Space"
date: 2015-02-01 04:24:53 -0800
comments: true
categories:
---

This post is going to be something of a pity party, so if those bother
you feel free to skip it.

<!--more-->

I've always known that I needed "my own space.' I always attributed
that to my general level of introversion. But recently it's becoming
clearer where some of that tendency comes from. I have really bad
allergies. As my doctor said to me after looking at my blood test
results "[I] was born to have allergies." When I was younger it was
primarily cats, dust mites and grass pollen that I was allergic
to. Oh, and rabbits.  Rabbits in a big way.

For about five years I got allergy shots. As I recall it, my allergist
at the time (who has the wonderful first name "Pandora") laid it out
like this. I would take allergy shots for about five years, starting
daily and then gradually over time spacing out to one every six
months. This would provide me with an increasing level of protection
from the things I was allergic to the longer I took the shots, and
then once I stopped at five years the protection would slowly fade
over the next five or so years.

I started this regimen when I was in middle school, probably 12 years
old. For a while it was a pain, but I adjusted to the schedule of
daily, then later multiple shots per week.  And my allergies improved.
I was still going to get a reaction if I went to visit a a friend who
owned a cat, but instead of starting to sneeze moments after I walked
in the door, I'd probably have to sit down on a cat-infused sofa. That
at least gave me time to dose myself with some antihistamine's which
would give me a few hours of normalcy.

In fact, my allergies got so much better that I stopped really
thinking about them. I no longer considered myself to be an "allergic
person." Then, around my second or third year at college, my allergies
started coming back in force.

There's a long story in there about how at the time I was living in a
group house that had a cat, and then I ended up leaving that house to
move in with my girlfriend Mirami who also had a cat. This may sound
crazy from someone who has self-described as "allergic to cats," but
like I said, I didn't really consider my allergies to be a critical
factor in my life. The next few years saw my allergies rather
thoroughly reassert themselves as a dominant factor in many of my
decisions.

When I moved in with Mirami and her cat, Jimmy Jazz, I ended up
getting allergies on a very regular basis. We quickly tried to
determine boundaries that would help stabilize things, but even
banning the cat from the bedroom and requiring Mirami to wash her
hands and face before coming to bed didn't prevent me from waking up
in the middle of the night most nights with a red, runny, itchy
nose. Needless to say it was a bit of a rough period.

The final kicker Pandora threw in was that by the time my ten years of
protection was up, "they" would hopefully have developed a more
effective treatment for allergies. Unlike the rest of her predictions,
that turns out not to have panned out quite as she hoped.
