Where exactly am I going with this piece now? It needs to come back
around a bit, but I'm not totally clear how.

what are the other points I want to hit? I don't think the outline
that's in there right now is really what I want. It's a bit too whiny
and personal. It reflects more of my fear and doubt about learning
something new than a piece of writing that I want other people to
read.

RIGHT!! I wanted to touch on some examples of situations where the
other reasons were true. And I need to bring it back around to why and
when comfortable tools are important. The main example left is Phil
Nelson's stodginess regarding CVS. He knows the tool so well... That
should feed well into humility.

I think there are two main things that I want to hit before I tie it
up. I want to talk about the prospect of trying to learn Vim and
qwerty again. Or vim in qwerty rather. speficially for compatibility
reasons and

oh, and humility. Beginner's mind.  That's a key part of it. I also
somehow want to hit on the style of pairing that Lindsey and I did at
HS of bouncing code off of github and switching who was working on it.

Oooh, maybe that's where I go. talk about the difficulties of pairing
and the consequences that my learning Dvorak has had. conveniently
makes it hard for people to use my comp without assistance. Then speak
about how I solved that problem at Hacker School with git and both of
us using our own environment. Or the swarm coding solution developed
by Phil Hagelberg. (Not really a solution in the same way.)

Then talk about the purpose of my apprenticeship here at 8th
Light. About how I was struck by the "requirement" for journeyman
apprentices to "have the humility to begin again." The importance for
me of being humble and vulnerable.  Being willing to say "I don't
know" and to not be the most knowledgable person in the room or the
company. (that trait is two-edged for sure. It drives me to learn and
grow and get better, but it also is problematic in me seeking out
assistance. it definitely held me back at hacker school from getting
as much as I could have out of it.)

And then say that I'm going to try and approach Vim and qwerty again
with humility

Maybe finalize the thought with how this will give me a stronger
position to criticize Vim from.
