---
layout: post
title: "The Teenage Liberation Handbook"
date: 2014-5-6 19:00:00 -0800
comments: true
categories: [Personal, S&E]
---

The book that has had the greatest impact on my educational journey is
_The Teenage Liberation Handbook: How to Quit School and Get a Real
Life and Education_ by Grace Llewellyn. An opinionated title to be
sure, and it is an opinionated book. I was first introduced to this
book by one of my most beloved high school teachers, Steve Miranda. He
gave the first chapter to us as a reading in a class entitled
_Literature and Philosophy_. The section we read is an allegory about
education that illustrates the author's view of what our educational
system does to the minds of the young. It is heartbreaking.

<!--more-->

Reading that story was probably the first time I was moved to tears by
a piece of writing. Just thinking about that time brings back powerful
emotions. That story spoke to me. The author Daniel Quinn defines a
story as a device that we humans use for understanding the world
around us better. This story helped me to make sense of my
relationship with school. It gave me permission to dislike school in a
way I never had felt free to before. It gave me words to articulate my
distaste, and it showed me that other people could and did feel the
same way.

I was touched also because the tale is legitimately a tragic one. It
tells the story of a young child, full of enthusiasm and the joy of
learning. And it shows how after exposure to the dull monotony of the
classroom environment and the "processed gruel" form of knowledge
found there, her enthusiasm steadily faded. And finally, it shows her
breaking free.

Perhaps the most important reason that this story was so powerful for
me was because it made me grieve for myself. It made me grieve for the
countless hours, mostly wasted, spent in that limiting school
environment.  It made me grieve for the massive amount of energy I
spent resisting the inertia of that system.  It made me grieve for all
of the times that I had forced myself to crush my own resistance. But
most of all it made me grieve for the lost opportunity that this story
represented.

How I wish I had found that book sooner. When I first read that story,
I was 18 and just three months away from graduating from high school.

I read the rest of book voraciously as soon as I could get my hands on
it. Through that, I gained a deeper understanding of the ideas about
school that Llewellyn hinted at in the portion of it that I read for
my class. _The Teenage Liberation Handbook_ describes something called
"unschooling." Llewellyn intentionally avoids using the term
"home-schooling" because of the baggage that it carries, and also
because of the connotations that it is just "school, but at home."

Unschooling is emphatically different from both traditional school,
and home-schooling. It emphasizes personal interest, and
self-direction. It defines the role of the parent as facilitator not
teacher. Most importantly, it emphasizes that learning can - and
should - happen anywhere, and anytime; in fact, it should happen
everywhere, and all the time.

The expressiveness of her allegory gave me a hint of what unschooling
offered.  That hint was enough for me to recognize that I had missed
my opportunity. I wanted it so badly.

The emotional response is a huge part of why this book was so
influential for me. But I also loved her vision. The more that I read
of it, the more engaged I became and the more excited and despairing I
felt. I was excited by the possibilities that I saw in what Llewellyn
described. I despaired because it seemed so unattainable for me. And I
struggled as I read that book. I struggled with whether I wanted to
quit school and pursue unschooling. Ultimately, I took the easier path
and simply graduated from high school. But even at that late date, I
was so inspired by her ideas that I wanted to immediately quit school
and pursue an unschooled education for myself.

Since then I have wanted to spread the message. The single thing that
bothers me most about my own history is that I never knew that I had
any choice other than school. Unfortunately, I'm not much of an
activist - far too introverted - and I don't personally know very many
teenagers.

So many other pieces of my educational journey since then are deeply
related to my reading of this book. The time that I took off after I
graduated high school is a prominent example. So is the two year break
I took between my junior and senior year at Western. I had been
considering taking time off after high school before I read the
handbook, but Llewellyn's description of what she called "the
Vacation" made me certain that I wanted that reset.

For a teen pursuing unschooling, the Vacation is the period of time
between when they stop attending traditional school, and when they
start pursuing their learning in earnest. Grace warns that if you try
and make the transition too quickly, too much baggage about learning
is carried along and your attempts at unschooling will be
disappointing at best and disastrous at worst. She devotes an entire
chapter to describing the importance of it, and she presents a very
convincing case.

Reading the _Teenage Liberation Handbook_ made me realize how toxic my
attitude towards school had become. Her words helped me decomplect my
feelings about school from my feelings about learning. It also helped
me to start to recognize the negative cycle I was in regarding hating
school and resisting the forms that it imposed. I realized that if I
was going to go to college, I needed to do it on my own terms, and I
needed to leave behind some of the baggage that I had accumulated
about education.
