---
layout: post
title: "Waiting"
date: 2014-6-3 19:00:00 -0800
comments: true
categories: [Personal, S&E]
---

When I read, I immerse myself in the words. Reading has always been
an escape for me. I would used to sit for hours in my mother's house
reading - no, devouring - books, using them to escape from the world
around me. I loved the fantasy books best, with their worlds of magic
and dragons, knights and villains.

I learned terrible habits about reading too. I wanted so much to be a
fast reader that my brain learned to identify passages that were “just
description.” I’ve never really gotten what people mean when they say
“I saw the book in my mind.” Visualization has never come easily to
me, and I think in part it’s because I never really read the
descriptions.

<!--more-->

But this is a weird contradiction. I wanted to escape into these
books, but I skimmed the details, the little essences? I don’t know.
But I find myself still doing it. I have to consciously slow myself
down in order to not skip them. I notice my eyes jump, and then
recognize that I didn’t actually read that last paragraph.

Part of my Fairhaven graduation requirement was the advanced seminar
class. In that class, we all read the book _Wave_ by Sonali
Deraniyagala. In it, she recounts her experience of being swept up in
the 2004 tsunami in Sri Lanka. She lost her whole family in an
instant. Her husband, two sons; both her parents. She also writes
about the aftermath in her life, of how she eventually is able to move
on and heal. It is a vivid book, and not one that I likely would have
sought out on my own.

Reading _Wave_ was a different experience for me than most books. I
didn’t want to escape into it. If anything, I wanted the opposite, to
help Sonali escape from the life of torment that she relates to us. I
have lost people in my life. My grandfather, more than a decade ago.
A childhood friend who I’d fallen out of touch with who took his own
life. More recently my grandmother; not dead, but lost to us through
Alzheimers. But it feels… not right to try and compare these to
Sonali’s loss. Not just because I wasn’t as close to these people as
she was to her family, though this is true. But because my experience
of those losses was so different, so much more distant.

There is a one point in her story that I can relate to. Towards the
middle, when she says "But there are those I see time and again , have
drinks with, share jokes, and even they don’t know." She talks about
feeling like a fraud. That not telling people she is "cut loose,
adrift, hazy about [her] identity." This I feel I know something
about.

It started out that I would take just one quarter off. Fall of 2012,
I signed up for classes, and then I simply couldn’t face it. In
retrospect, it was amazingly fortuitous. Almost like I knew, deep
down what was going to happen. Instead of school, I decided to try and
find work as a programmer. To validate for myself whether finishing up
my degree was really necessary. This was hard. I learned many hard
lessons that fall. About managing my time, about the kinds of jobs I
did not want to do. About the kind of clients to avoid. Then, the
week after Thanksgiving, my mother was diagnosed with brain cancer.

It started with her having trouble walking. I noticed while strolling
through the autumnal Arboretum in Seattle near her house. Her right
foot kept dragging. I asked her about it, and she said it felt very
odd. On Monday she'd make an appointment with her doctor to see what
was going on. But two days later she couldn't move her leg at all.

Everything after that was a blur. Frantic calls to the doctor,
eventually rushing off to the hospital. So many of her close friends
clustered around, I felt lost in the confusion and chaos. In the
midst of this, I had just started negotiating with a potential new
client. I kept talking to them, worried enough about my finances that
it didn't really sink how serious the situation with my mother really
was.

I imagine what would have happened if I had tried to take classes that
fall. I would have gone home over Thanksgiving, much as I actually
did. Then, when my mother was spending her first couple days in the
hospital, getting a biopsy of her brain, I would have been in the
midst of dead week. Before we really knew what was wrong with her, I
would have been immersed in preparing for finals. While she was trying
to reacclimatize to her own home, I might have been taking finals.

Or else, I would have dropped it all. An entire quarter's worth of
time and effort made meaningless in the space of a phone call. I'm
honestly not sure what I would have done, how things would have gone.

The months that followed were also a whirl. The madness of trying to
reorganize her home so that she could live there. Starting
chemotherapy and radiation treatments. I could smell the poison in the
chemo pills. The smell of their residue in her urine permeated the
bathroom. This didn't seem like healing. I saw my mother, the
strongest person that I know, utterly defeated and humiliated.

But all of this was in Seattle. To my friends in Bellingham, I simply
disappeared. I only personally told three or four people. Many more
have heard either from my loving girlfriend or through the proverbial
grapevine. It was agonizing revealing this massive thing to a few
close friends. The thought of telling everyone was overwhelming. I
wanted people to know but not to have to tell them. That made it
awkward. Most people don't just bring something like that up.

At a time when I most needed my friends physical presence and support,
everyone seemed determined to let me have my space. But I couldn't
reach out to them, to tell them that wasn't what I needed. I didn't
know what I needed.

The first time I told someone not close to me was an old roommate of
mine. I ran into her in the grocery store in Bellingham. We chatted
for a moment, this and that. Then she asked what I was up to. I said
living in Seattle, and she asked "Why?" "Because my mother has brain
cancer." I responded. That pretty much ended the conversation. I felt
sad. I hadn't meant to drop that weight on her; as Sonali says, "it's
too horrifying, too huge." But I didn't know how to reveal it any
other way.

Gradually I learned how to be more circumspect. "My mother is very
ill." My therapist suggested that. She helped me brainstorm. Helped me
navigate between the feelings of deceit for hiding it and not being
able to tell. I also grew more comfortable with the weight of it. I no
longer needed to try and lay it down so abruptly, the way one drops a
heavy stone. I grew stronger, and marveled at my own strength.

So one quarter turned into two, then three. Suddenly a year had
passed. Eventually, our lives calmed and settled enough that I sought
an internship at a local tech company. I stayed there for six months.
I found stability in the day-to-day routine of working nine to five.
Or more accurately, ten to six.

Now, more than two years later, my mother is doing quite well. It’s
strange to be back in Bellingham, and to still have friends who don’t
know what has happened. She is responding to treatment so well, it
seems like the emergency has been put on hold. But in another way, we
are all still waiting for the other shoe to drop. But we have to stop
waiting at some point.
