---
layout: post
title: "The Single Story"
date: 2014-4-26 19:00:00 -0800
comments: true
categories: [Personal, S&E]
---

## Beginnings
I have a story about myself and education.  That story goes like this.
I hate school.  No, I mean I HATE it.  I always have.  The proof is
that one time when I was in preschool, I noticed that every morning I
put clothes on right before I was taken to school.  So, I reasoned, if
I didn't put clothes on, I couldn't go to school!  This clever plan
backfired unfortunately when my mother in frustration packed me into
the car buck naked and drove me anyways.

<!--more-->

This is my standard story about my relationship with school.  It
exemplifies the deep antipathy that I hold towards it, as well as
revealing a somewhat embarrassing story about myself that is quite
amusing. Most of all it is a story that I enjoy telling, both to
myself and to others.

But really, my relationship with school is much more complicated than
that. I love learning.  Here's another story about my relationship
with school.  In 7th grade I almost failed math. I went to a small
private school, so when my teacher noticed me struggling, instead of
putting me in the low track immediately, she talked to my mom and they
made a deal.  If I could complete a packet of homework over the summer
I could be placed in the "intermediate" track.

So over the summer, my mother hired a neighborhood college student to
tutor me in math and ultimate frisbee.  Under his kind and encouraging
supervision, I learned lots of little shortcuts and managed to fill in
most of the holes in my math knowledge. I also developed a wicked
Frisbee forehand.  The next year, I aced the intermediate math class.
I loved it.  My math teacher was a kooky old Irish man with eyebrows
that covered half of his forehead.  He took a special interest in me,
and managed to cement my love of math.

Yet a third story.  In my 11th grade pre-calculus course, we studied
proofs.  It was my first introduction to them and I immediately fell
in love.  I did reasonably well in the class, but at the end of the
year my teacher gave out some awards.  I got the award for "highest
learning to grade ratio."

In the end, these stories are only snapshots of my experience as a
student. Broader themes have emerged though. Throughout my entire
educational career I have struggled with the disconnect between what
schools claim to be doing - helping students learn - and what I was
actually experiencing.  When the dissonance was mild, I enjoyed school
and invariably excelled.  When it was great, I struggled.  I struggled
to meet both my need to learn, and grow and the schools need to
document and have me prove that learning.

This documenting process - embodied in the assignment of grades, and
the giving of tests - was one of the hardest things for me to deal
with. My single-story casts me in the role of a daring protagonist
pitted against the brutal institution of school.  At least that's how
it plays out in my mind.  But as my other stories show, that's not the
whole truth of how my educational journey has gone.  My dislike for
school has varied in intensity and in expression.  When I was in
elementary and high-school it manifested most through extreme
procrastination on homework.  This had other negative consequences.
My perfectionist nature led to lots of late nights spent furiously
working on projects at the last minute. I'm sure this caused my mother
more than a few grey hairs.

In addition, this pattern turned into a self-fulfilling prophecy about
why I hated schools. The things that I hate most about schools are the
bookkeeping and bureaucracy.  Turning in late work, or turning in
half-finished assignments is a good way to experience the worst of
both those aspects.  I think in some ways too, I wanted to blame my
procrastination on the school.  I knew that I could do better than
what I presented in much of my schoolwork and I was angry with myself
for not taking the steps needed to make sure that I did better.  In
the end, it was much easier for me to blame it on the school and keep
repeating the pattern. This cycle dominated my educational experience
from kindergarten all the way through until I graduated high school.

## Vacation

By the time I was a senior in high-school, I was thoroughly sick of
educational institutions.  I had learned fairly well how to game the
system.  I was able to utilize the Running Start program to complete
my last couple of credits in half the time.  So my senior year I had a
light load the first semester and only one class the second.  As all
my classmates were furiously applying to colleges and visiting
campuses, I calmly decided that I was going to take a year off.

At the time I also felt strongly that there was only one school that I
had any desire to attend, St. John's College.  I applied to St. John's
during my senior year, and against my father's strong wishes to the
contrary, I informed them that I had no intention of actually
enrolling for the following academic year.  I requested that they
still consider my application as though I was applying for the current
year. I was accepted, and immediately exercised my option to defer
admission until 2007.

The adults in my life had many and varied reactions to my decision to
take a year off.  Thankfully, my mother was my staunchest supporter.
I lost a lot of respect for one of my favorite high-school teachers
when he strongly counseled me to "just go to college" because "it will
open doors for you."  All of the advice was well meant I'm sure, but I
didn't really hear the words that most people were using.

Instead, whenever I heard someone tell me that I should "just get it
out of the way" or something similar, what I heard head was "you won't
go back."  Some people said this explicitly, or cited examples of
young hoodlums that they knew who had started out with just one year
off, and now, ten years later were still working a dead-end job and
living in their mother's basement.  This last may have struck home
more than I wanted to admit; at the time I _did_ live in my mother's
basement.  This stunning lack of faith incensed me.  I know it wasn't
specific to me.  It seemed to simply be the prevailing wisdom about
college at the time.  But I knew from the inside that if I later
decided that I wanted to go back to school, I could and would do so.

This personal faith in myself is deeply rooted in my family
culture. My mother recently picked up a saying that exemplifies her
faith in my sister and I quite well: "You can do hard things." My own
email signature for a long time has been "Nothing is ever easy."  This
comes from a book where the expanded phrase is "Nothing _worth doing_
is ever easy."  I think there is something powerful for me in the
union of these two aphorisms.  My phrase is a reminder that things in
life will be difficult; this is a critical reminder for someone with a
tendency towards perfectionism.  My mother's phrase completes this by
heading off the _reductio ad absurdum_ that since everything is so
difficult, you might as well give up now.  In my journey towards
becoming a better student and a better learner, the personal power
that comes from accomplishment has been key.
