---
layout: post
title: "Gap Yearg"
date: 2014-5-10 19:00:00 -0800
comments: true
categories: [Personal, S&E]
---

So I followed through and took one year off from school. A "Gap Year"
as it is somewhat euphemistically referred to. I spent some time
working for a cousin in Portland doing construction. After that I
helped my dad move a boat from Puerto Vallarta to San Diego. When I
returned from that, I was hired by a family friend, David Firth, as a
shop hand for his small business.

That was about six months into my Vacation.  Shortly after I started
working for him, I had to start thinking about whether I was going to
return to school the following fall. It was immediately clear to me
that I was still not ready to go back, so one year turned into two.

<!--more-->

I ended up working for David Firth for most of the balance of my
Vacation. I learned a fantastic amount there. David is an amazing man,
both incredibly intelligent and talented, and incredibly driven.

I learned many things during my time working with him. He directly
trained me in many tasks and skills; through my work I got the chance
to practice and develop others. I learned how to pressure seal and
test a vacuum tank, prepare and wire complex devices, turn metal on a
lathe, use a mill, hand-form sheet metal, arc-weld sheet metal, pour a
polyethylene mold, along with many other skills.

David also taught me to use "gentle but appropriate force." When I
first started working for him, I had a tendency to apply all of my
strength to any given task. He taught me to pay attention to what I
was applying force to - whether it was tightening a bolt, or replacing
a light bulb - and to gauge whether or not I was over-stressing the
material. This was an invaluable help to me, at a time when I was
still becoming used to the full strength of my adult body.

David also taught me many things implicitly. Since I was his only
employee, I got to work very closely with him. My job was essentially
to build the machines that he spent his days designing. When I
encountered unexpected difficulties in production, I would ask David
how to resolve them. This occurred often at first as I was still
learning the process of building the machines. Later, the difficulties
were fewer but often more profound.

Sometimes when I encountered a difficulty in some assembly step, it
wasn't indicative of my lack of expertise. Sometimes it was the
process itself that was flawed. As David inspected every issue he
would analyze the problem out loud. He didn't do this for my benefit;
it was his process. But it gave me the chance to watch him at work. As
he was analyzing the issues, he compared them to his intentions in the
design phase; he triaged which problems were design flaws, and which
were caused by imprecision in the work done by outside
contractors. And he talked about the solutions.

It was during one of these reactive design sessions that I decided to
go back to school. I was so inspired by my exposure to his design
process, that I wanted to pursue a discipline that would allow me to
do that kind of work. I have always loved "inventing" things.  When I
was little, my mother had a box of mechanical, electrical and plumbing
junk that was my "invention box." Really the process that I love is
designing things. I used to spend hours drawing pictures of devices
that I wanted to build. I've continued to do this throughout my life,
up to and including while I was working for David. However, I rarely,
if ever actually ended up building any of my creations. Working with
David, I got a glimpse of what it would take to bring my ideas into
the world. It made me want to be able to do that.

I decided to return to college to pursue an engineering degree. In
retrospect, I'm not sure why I decided on engineering. David's degree
was in Industrial Design. Perhaps I felt intimidated by the art
requirements. Regardless, because of my new rationale for college, I
started looking beyond St. John's to different schools with good
engineering programs. During this time, my mother urged me once again
to take a look at Western Washington University.

## Going Back?

Mostly to humor my mother, I did some browsing around on the internet
about Western. Somehow, I stumbled across the Fairhaven College
website and was intrigued enough to stick around. I ended up finding a
list of colleges that had similar goals as Fairhaven. Seeing both
St. John's College and Colorado College - another college I was very
intrigued by - on the list, I was immediately sold. Once again, when
it came time to apply, I knew that Western, and specifically
Fairhaven, was the only school that I was interested in attending. I
applied only to Fairhaven, and visited the campus for the first time
on the day of my Fairhaven interview.

As I was preparing to go to Western during the last few months that I
worked for David Firth, I started to teach myself programming. That
was actually part of how I knew I was in a better space to go back to
school. I had rediscovered my love of learning, and was pursuing it in
my own free time for my own sake. I have wanted to learn to program
for a long time. It's very difficult at this point to pinpoint when
that desire first manifested itself, because for a long time it didn't
seem feasible. I didn't have much access to computers when I was
younger, and certainly no mentors to help me get started on that
path. So I just sort of admired computers from arm's length. When I
combined this long standing semi-obsession with the sense of
empowerment and increased interest in learning I got from taking time
off, it was inevitable that I would start programming; and I loved it.

I spent most of my first year at Western taking mainly Fairhaven
classes. Along with those, I took the entry level programming class
during winter quarter, and did quite well. During spring quarter, I
took my first engineering class. The difference between the two was
extreme. Despite some initial frustrations with the programming
language used in Computer Science 141, I thoroughly enjoyed the
class. Engineering Technology 110 was a very different story.

From a certain perspective, it might just have been happenstance. I
enjoyed the engineering class, but I had no preparation for it. At the
same time, I got the feeling that a significant number of the other
students already had a greater amount of knowledge and experience. In
the programming class though, I was clearly ahead of the curve. During
the weekly labs it was obvious that there were only a few other people
that knew as much about programming as I did. For this class I was
clearly over-prepared. These seemingly minor differences resulted in
massively different reactions from me. Solely on the basis of those
two classes I decided to pursue a computer science major instead of
engineering.

In another lifetime I can see myself getting more hands on experience
building things when I was little. Instead of spending all of my
energy on the initial design phase, I would have learned more about
how to actually build things. This would have prepared me better for
the engineering class, and I might have had an experience more
comparable to the programming class.  What I don't know is whether
that would have made a difference. As I said earlier, I spent quite a
lot of time building things with David.

In some respects, this story about how and why I became a CS major is
another "single story" that I tell myself about my life. But this
story isn't really serving a particular purpose; it's mostly because I
forget the other parts. In reality, I didn't first teach myself to
program while I was working for David Firth right before I started at
Western in 2008. It really started six years earlier, when I was 14.
