---
layout: post
title: "On Editors and their Benefits"
date: 2015-04-16 00:58:26 -0500
comments: true
categories: [Emacs, Vim, Social, Brains]
---

Stuff and things. About the struggle of liking emacs and things,
Dvorak being really hard.  Being excited about 8th Light,
etc. but having an issue reconciling the two. Curiosity about
learning Vim's interface.

Worried about how trying to learn another set of keybindings will
affect my mastery of emacs keybindings. Also worried about adding
more things to my already seemingly significant workload of
learning at 8th Light. Is it the best time to learn these new
tools, or the worst?

When is proficiency in a tool more important than other
considerations like compatibility with teammates, or using the
"best" tool.  This relates well to Phil Nelson's usage of CVS and
his entrenchedness in it. In many ways I feel the same about
emacs and git and the tools that I know. But I also think that
they're better.

Ultimately, I think that the answer most of the time is that the
tools you know best and are most comfortable with are the best
ones to use. Unless they are obviously inappropriate for the job.

Disliking the hostility of Vim user's towards emacs. I think
there's an important lesson in that about having awareness of
your own prejudices. Often we think of these things only in the
more "important" matters of race, gender, and sexuality
discrimination but prejudices are prejudices and if we're blind
to some of our own prejudices, the chances that we're blind to
others seems high. On the other hand, developing the habit of
watching and introspecting ourselves about our potential
prejudices seems like the way to avoiding being prejudiced in all
things. Sometimes it's easier to start with the relatively
inconsequential thing.

<!--more-->

connect with Brett victor's preciousness and fragility of ideas.
Maybe, proficiency in a tool becomes more important when it
enables you to nurture and bring to fruition more and fragiler
ideas.  Or maybe when it simply enables ideas, and thinking more
deeply.

My experience of trying to code in vim, typing in QWERTY was
illustrative of this. I approached it differently in thinking,
and I had to devote so much mental energy to thinking about how
to type the code in, that there's no way that I could hold the
same amount of complexity in my head that I do when I'm coding in
emacs.

this may be a blessing and a curse. For trying to think in a new
paradigm, the way that I need to with TDD it might be
fundamentally easier to do when I'm not in the familiar
environment of Emacs and Dvorak. Mental ruts are definitely a
real phenomenon.
